---
layout: editions_two-columns
title: Versions of Melville
permalink: /versions-of-melville
 
---
 
During his lifetime, Melville published nine book-length works of fiction, a collection of tales, and four volumes of poetry. At his death, among other documents, he left in manuscript several uncollected tales (including  _Billy Budd_), numerous poems (including  _Weeds & Wildings_), and a handful of reviews, including his literary manifesto “Hawthorne and His Mosses.” Most of Melville’s manuscripts appeared posthumously in print. For various reasons, almost every Melville title exists in multiple versions, either in print or manuscript, due to authorial or editorial revision. Changes to a work also occur in forms of adaptive revision, with or without authorial control, as in plays, films, opera, or even the cultural “meme.” As a body of work that exists in multiple versions, Melville’s corpus of writing is a remarkable fluid text, and therefore a considerable challenge, editorially and digitally.

MEL’s editorial project—funded by NEH and supported by Hofstra University and its Digital Research Center (DRC)—began its work by designing “model editions” of three exemplary Melville works:  _Moby-Dick_,  _Battle-Pieces_, and  _Billy Budd_. By resolving the different editorial and digital problems that each work poses, these models will serve as templates for MEL’s editions of additional works. Why we chose these three fluid texts as models for digital editing has to do with the nature of print, manuscript, prose, poetry, and digital technology.

## TRACKING THE VERSIONS

**_Moby-Dick_**. First appearing in 1851 in an American and an expurgated British first edition, Melville’s best-known work is also a significant example of a fluid text in print. In addition to the two first editions, scholarly editors create their own versions. For instance, the standard Northwestern-Newberry (NN) edition of  _Moby-Dick_  generally follows the American text but mixes into it elements from the British edition; it corrects obvious errors but also adds new wordings that represent what the NN editors believe Melville actually intended. The Longman Critical Edition of  _Moby-Dick_—a fluid-text print edition edited by John Bryant and Haskell Springer—also follows the American text and makes corrections of obvious errors, but it does not mix versions. Instead, it provides a set of “revision narratives” that demonstrate changes—regarding style, aesthetics, and matters of sex, religion, or politics—made to Melville’s text, either by Melville himself or his editors, both historical and modern. To create  **_Versions of Moby-Dick_**  MEL’s editors use Juxta Editions to collate the American and British editions, highlight all variants (or textual fluidities), and display revision narratives explaining each change. Juxta Editions also enables MEL editors to provide textual notes and contextual annotations, with links to images and data in MELCat. In future development, MEL will extend the navigation of the versions of  _Moby-Dick_  to include adaptive revisions of the novel, particularly in film.

Digitally, the challenge of  _Moby-Dick_  lies in establishing protocols for transcribing and coding a prose fiction, in print only.  _Billy Budd_  poses the entirely different problem of editing a fluid text that exists fundamentally in manuscript but also in non-authorized, modern print transcriptions.

**_Billy Budd_****.** Melville left his completed but unpolished manuscript of  _Billy Budd_unpublished at the time of his death in 1891. The manuscript is riddled with thousands of revisions, in pencil and ink, that bear striking evidence of the writer’s shifting intentions throughout at least three versions, layered over some 350 leaves, representing at least eight stages of composition. The novella first appeared in print in Raymond Weaver’s 1924 transcription (corrected in 1928). More accurate transcriptions based on more ambitious analyses of the manuscript appeared in F. Barron Freeman’s 1948 version and in Harrison Hayford and Merton M. Sealts, Jr.’s 1962 edition. A slightly modified version of the Hayford and Sealts text appears in the 2017 NN edition of  _Billy Budd_. These four scholarly editions base their texts on direct transcriptions or inspections of the  _Billy Budd_  manuscript, located at Harvard’s Houghton Library. Each of the three twentieth-century transcriptions vary significantly from each other, and only the 1962 edition provides a “genetic transcription” as a textual apparatus.

MEL’s  **_Versions of Billy Budd_**  assembles both manuscript and print versions of the work, and to meet this challenge, MEL developed TextLab. This innovative tool enables editors to mark-up revision sites on manuscript leaves, transcribe each leaf (including its revision texts), automatically code the additions and deletions, and generate a “diplomatic transcription” (a typographical simulation of each leaf or page) that is in turn a platform for displaying revision sequences and narratives for each revision site. TextLab also automatically generates MEL’s base version of the  _Billy Budd_  manuscript—essentially Melville’s final reading version with additions added and deletions deleted—which can be collated with the three twentieth-century transcriptions.

**_Battle-Pieces_**.**  Melville’s first published volume of poetry,  _Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War_, poses other problems. Although working drafts of these Civil War poems have not survived, evidence of Melville’s post-publication revisions appears in pencil on certain poems in two of his personal copies of the book. _Battle-Pieces_  presents the digital problem not only of coding for poetry rather than prose but also of layering handwritten revisions over text in print. Melville also published a handful of  _Battle-Pieces_  poems in magazines before the volume’s publication, and certain poems appeared as reprints in other publications in Melville’s life. The challenge of integrating magazine and anthology texts along with Melville’s penciled revisions is also addressed in the modeling of  **_Versions of Battle-Pieces_**.

In addition to these matters of textual fluidity, each of MEL’s model editions includes sets of contextual annotation, which involve the work of our four MEL research groups—Art, History, Travel, and Editions—and their implementation of two other tools: MELCat and Juxta Editions. These tools, along with TextLab (and others), are explained in  [MEL’s Tool Kit.](/tool-kit.html)

----------

In 2017, MEL will begin work on editions of  _Typee_,  _Piazza Tales_, Melville’s journals, and the Melville Family Correspondence.
